CONTRIBUTING.md, before:

# Contributing to SMARTHAUS

Thank you for your interest in contributing to SMARTHAUS! We welcome contributions from anyone who shares our vision of **mathematics as the nervous system of AI**.

This document provides guidelines for contributing to any SMARTHAUS repository. Each repository may have additional specific guidelines, but these organization-wide standards apply to all contributions.

## 📜 Our Philosophy

SMARTHAUS contributions are guided by our core principles:

- **Mathematics First**: All changes must maintain mathematical rigor and provable correctness
- **Deterministic Guarantees**: Contributions must preserve deterministic behavior
- **Scientific Integrity**: All claims must be verifiable and falsifiable
- **Collaborative Excellence**: We work together to advance mathematical AI understanding

## 🚀 Getting Started

### Prerequisites

- **Git**: Version control system
- **Python 3.10+**: Required for most repositories
- **Docker**: For containerized development and testing
- **Make**: Build automation (optional but recommended)

### Repository Structure

SMARTHAUS repositories follow consistent patterns:

```
repository/
├── src/                    # Source code
├── tests/                  # Unit and integration tests
├── docs/                   # Documentation
├── notebooks/              # Verification notebooks (math repos)
├── invariants/             # Mathematical invariants (math repos)
├── examples/               # Usage examples
├── scripts/                # Utility scripts
├── pyproject.toml          # Python package configuration
├── Makefile                # Build automation
├── README.md              # Repository documentation
└── SECURITY.md            # Security information
```

### Development Setup

1. **Fork and Clone**:
   ```bash
   # Fork the repository on GitHub
   # Clone your fork
   git clone https://github.com/yourusername/repository-name.git
   cd repository-name

   # Add upstream remote
   git remote add upstream https://github.com/SmartHausGroup/repository-name.git
   ```

2. **Environment Setup**:
   ```bash
   # Create virtual environment
   python -m venv .venv
   source .venv/bin/activate  # On Windows: .venv\Scripts\activate

   # Install dependencies
   pip install -e ".[dev]"

   # Install pre-commit hooks
   pre-commit install
   ```

3. **Verify Setup**:
   ```bash
   # Run basic tests
   make test-unit

   # Run quality checks
   make lint

   # Run mathematical verification (if applicable)
   make verify-math
   ```

## 📋 Contribution Workflow

### 1. Choose Work

- **Check Issues**: Look for issues labeled `good first issue`, `help wanted`, or `mathematical`
- **Propose Ideas**: Open an issue to discuss new ideas before implementing
- **Mathematical Focus**: Contributions involving mathematical guarantees are highly valued

### 2. Create Branch

```bash
# For features
git checkout -b feature/your-feature-name

# For bug fixes
git checkout -b fix/issue-number-description

# For mathematical improvements
git checkout -b math/improved-invariant-verification

# For documentation
git checkout -b docs/update-api-reference
```

### 3. Implement Changes

Follow the **Mathematical Autopsy** process for math-related changes:

#### Phase 1: Intent & Description
- Document the problem and solution approach
- Define success criteria

#### Phase 2: Mathematical Foundation
- Formalize mathematics in documentation
- Define equations, invariants, and guarantees

#### Phase 3: Implementation
- Write code that implements the documented math
- Maintain mathematical correctness

#### Phase 4: Verification
- Create verification notebooks (for mathematical repos)
- Prove invariants with executable code
- Generate artifacts for CI validation

#### Phase 5: Validation
- Run all tests and quality checks
- Ensure mathematical guarantees are maintained

### 4. Quality Standards

#### Code Quality
- **Type Hints**: All functions must have type annotations
- **Documentation**: Comprehensive docstrings for public APIs
- **Linting**: Pass all automated code quality checks
- **Testing**: Minimum 80% test coverage

#### Mathematical Rigor
- **Invariants**: Define mathematical constraints that must hold
- **Verification**: Provide executable proofs of correctness
- **Determinism**: Ensure deterministic behavior with seeded randomness
- **Documentation**: Document all mathematical assumptions and guarantees

#### Security
- **Input Validation**: Validate all inputs to prevent injection attacks
- **Cryptographic Security**: Use proper cryptographic primitives
- **Access Control**: Implement proper authorization checks
- **Audit Trails**: Log security-relevant events

### 5. Testing

#### Unit Tests
```python
import pytest
from your_module import YourClass

class TestYourClass:
    def test_basic_functionality(self):
        """Test basic functionality with clear assertions."""
        instance = YourClass()
        result = instance.process("input")
        assert result is not None
        assert isinstance(result, ExpectedType)

    def test_edge_cases(self):
        """Test edge cases and error conditions."""
        instance = YourClass()

        # Test invalid inputs
        with pytest.raises(ValueError):
            instance.process(None)

        # Test boundary conditions
        result = instance.process("")
        assert result == expected_empty_result
```

#### Integration Tests
```python
import pytest
from httpx import AsyncClient
from your_service import app

@pytest.mark.asyncio
async def test_api_integration():
    """Test full API integration."""
    async with AsyncClient(app=app, base_url="http://test") as client:
        response = await client.post("/api/endpoint", json={"data": "test"})
        assert response.status_code == 200

        result = response.json()
        assert "result" in result
        assert result["success"] is True
```

#### Mathematical Verification
```python
# In verification notebooks
import numpy as np
from your_math_module import mathematical_function

# Set seed for deterministic testing
np.random.seed(42)

def test_mathematical_guarantees():
    """Test mathematical invariants and guarantees."""

    # Test energy conservation
    input_signal = np.random.randn(1000)
    output_signal = mathematical_function(input_signal)

    # Parseval's theorem: Energy conservation in FFT
    input_energy = np.sum(np.abs(input_signal) ** 2)
    output_energy = np.sum(np.abs(output_signal) ** 2)

    # Allow small numerical errors
    assert abs(input_energy - output_energy) < 1e-10

    # Test determinism
    output_signal_2 = mathematical_function(input_signal)
    assert np.allclose(output_signal, output_signal_2)
```

### 6. Documentation

#### Code Documentation
```python
def complex_mathematical_function(
    signal: np.ndarray,
    frequency_cutoff: float,
    sampling_rate: int
) -> np.ndarray:
    """
    Apply mathematical transformation to signal.

    This function implements a mathematically verified transformation
    that preserves signal energy while filtering frequencies.

    Args:
        signal: Input signal array
        frequency_cutoff: Cutoff frequency in Hz
        sampling_rate: Signal sampling rate in Hz

    Returns:
        Filtered signal with same energy as input

    Raises:
        ValueError: If parameters are invalid

    Mathematical Guarantee:
        Energy conservation: ∫|input(t)|²dt = ∫|output(t)|²dt

    Example:
        >>> signal = np.random.randn(1000)
        >>> filtered = complex_mathematical_function(signal, 100, 1000)
        >>> assert np.isclose(np.sum(signal**2), np.sum(filtered**2))
    """
```

#### README Updates
Update repository README.md for any user-facing changes:
- New features or capabilities
- API changes
- Configuration updates
- Breaking changes

### 7. Commit Standards

#### Commit Message Format
```
type(scope): description

[optional body]

[optional footer]
```

#### Types
- `feat`: New features
- `fix`: Bug fixes
- `docs`: Documentation changes
- `style`: Code style changes
- `refactor`: Code refactoring
- `test`: Adding or updating tests
- `chore`: Maintenance tasks
- `math`: Mathematical improvements or proofs

#### Examples
```
feat(auth): add OAuth2 integration with cryptographic verification

fix(api): resolve memory leak in batch processing endpoint

math(invariants): strengthen energy conservation proof with formal verification

docs(api): update parameter descriptions for clarity
```

#### Scope
- `api`: API-related changes
- `auth`: Authentication/authorization
- `math`: Mathematical components
- `security`: Security features
- `ui`: User interface (if applicable)

### 8. Pull Request Process

#### PR Template
Use the organization PR template with:

1. **Description**: Clear explanation of changes
2. **Type of Change**: Bug fix, feature, breaking change, etc.
3. **Testing**: Unit tests, integration tests, mathematical verification
4. **Quality Assurance**: Code quality, security review, performance impact
5. **Documentation**: Updates made or needed
6. **Breaking Changes**: Migration instructions if applicable

#### PR Checklist
- [ ] **Mathematical Verification**: Invariants validated, notebooks run
- [ ] **Testing**: All tests pass, coverage maintained
- [ ] **Code Quality**: Linting passes, type hints complete
- [ ] **Security**: Security implications reviewed
- [ ] **Documentation**: README and API docs updated
- [ ] **Breaking Changes**: Migration guide provided if needed

#### Review Process
1. **Automated Checks**: CI/CD runs all quality gates
2. **Peer Review**: At least one maintainer reviews code
3. **Mathematical Review**: Math-related changes reviewed by math experts
4. **Security Review**: Security implications assessed
5. **Merge**: Squash merge with conventional commit message

## 🎯 Contribution Areas

### High-Impact Contributions

#### Mathematical Research
- Improve mathematical foundations
- Strengthen invariants and proofs
- Develop new verification techniques
- Advance deterministic AI theory

#### Security Enhancements
- Cryptographic improvements
- Access control enhancements
- Audit trail improvements
- Security testing frameworks

#### Performance Optimization
- Algorithm improvements with mathematical guarantees
- Memory optimization with energy conservation
- Parallel processing enhancements
- Scalability improvements

### Getting Help

- **Documentation**: Check repository-specific docs first
- **Issues**: Search existing GitHub issues
- **Discussions**: Use GitHub Discussions for questions
- **Community**: Join our community forum

## 📋 Code of Conduct

All contributors must adhere to our [Code of Conduct](CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md), which emphasizes:

- Mathematical rigor and scientific integrity
- Respectful collaboration
- Professional conduct
- Commitment to diversity and inclusion

## 📄 License

By contributing to SMARTHAUS, you agree that your contributions will be licensed under the same license as the repository you're contributing to.

## 🙏 Recognition

Contributors are recognized through:

- **GitHub Contributors**: Listed in repository contributor graphs
- **Changelog**: Mentioned in release notes
- **Community**: Featured in community spotlights
- **Events**: Invited to speak at SMARTHAUS events

## 📞 Contact

- **General Questions**: Open a GitHub Discussion
- **Technical Issues**: Create a GitHub Issue
- **Security Issues**: security@smarthaus.group
- **Business Inquiries**: business@smarthaus.group

---

**Thank you for contributing to the future of mathematics-driven AI!** 🧮✨

Your contributions help advance our mission of building AI systems where mathematics serves as the nervous system, enabling provably correct, deterministic, and trustworthy artificial intelligence.

Commit message:

Docs overhaul: advisory-first deterministic AI positioning
- Added advisory section: 13 new pages (overview, methodology, guarantees,
  5 service pages, 3 vertical pages, self-service, landing page)
- Updated copy-docs.js with advisory content mappings
- Updated sidebars.js with Advisory category (after Methodology, before Archetypes)
- Rewrote docs/intro.md to advisory-first, research-driven identity
- Rewrote profile/README.md (about page) to advisory + research positioning
- Created SMARTHAUS_VISION.md with deterministic AI through mathematics framing
- Expanded mathematical-autopsy/README.md with client-facing phase framing
- Updated docusaurus.config.js: advisory-first tagline, navbar, footer
- Purged all AIDF / AI Development Framework references
- Added .gitignore entries for governance files (not published to GitHub profile)

Plan: plan:web-presence-overhaul Phase 1 — docs.smarthaus.ai complete.
Made-with: Cursor

CONTRIBUTING.md, after:

# Contributing to SMARTHAUS

Thank you for your interest in contributing to SMARTHAUS! We welcome contributions from anyone who shares our vision of **mathematics as the nervous system of AI**.

This document provides guidelines for contributing to any SMARTHAUS repository. Each repository may have additional specific guidelines, but these organization-wide standards apply to all contributions.

## 📜 Our Philosophy

SMARTHAUS contributions are guided by our core principles:

- **Mathematics First**: All changes must maintain mathematical rigor and provable correctness
- **Deterministic Guarantees**: Contributions must preserve deterministic behavior
- **Scientific Integrity**: All claims must be verifiable and falsifiable
- **Collaborative Excellence**: We work together to advance mathematical AI understanding

## 📖 Documentation (docs.smarthaus.ai)

When contributing to this docs site:

- **Tone**: Precise and technical; no marketing fluff. Explain concepts clearly.
- **First-use definitions**: Define acronyms and key terms on first use, or link to the [Glossary](/glossary) (e.g. [RFS](/glossary#rfs), [MA](/glossary#ma), [TAI](/glossary#tai), [AIVA](/glossary#aiva)).
- **Invariants and contracts**: Put formal invariants, contracts, or constraints in admonitions (callouts) so they stand out.
- **Cross-links**: Link to the marketing site for product pages and contact: [smarthaus.ai](https://smarthaus.ai). Use consistent link text (“Documentation” from marketing → docs; “Website” from docs → marketing).

## 🚀 Getting Started

### Prerequisites

- **Git**: Version control system
- **Python 3.10+**: Required for most repositories
- **Docker**: For containerized development and testing
- **Make**: Build automation (optional but recommended)

### Repository Structure

SMARTHAUS repositories follow consistent patterns:

```
repository/
├── src/                    # Source code
├── tests/                  # Unit and integration tests
├── docs/                   # Documentation
├── notebooks/              # Verification notebooks (math repos)
├── invariants/             # Mathematical invariants (math repos)
├── examples/               # Usage examples
├── scripts/                # Utility scripts
├── pyproject.toml          # Python package configuration
├── Makefile                # Build automation
├── README.md              # Repository documentation
└── SECURITY.md            # Security information
```

### Development Setup

1. **Fork and Clone**:
   ```bash
   # Fork the repository on GitHub
   # Clone your fork
   git clone https://github.com/yourusername/repository-name.git
   cd repository-name

   # Add upstream remote
   git remote add upstream https://github.com/SmartHausGroup/repository-name.git
   ```

2. **Environment Setup**:
   ```bash
   # Create virtual environment
   python -m venv .venv
   source .venv/bin/activate  # On Windows: .venv\Scripts\activate

   # Install dependencies
   pip install -e ".[dev]"

   # Install pre-commit hooks
   pre-commit install
   ```

3. **Verify Setup**:
   ```bash
   # Run basic tests
   make test-unit

   # Run quality checks
   make lint

   # Run mathematical verification (if applicable)
   make verify-math
   ```

## 📋 Contribution Workflow

### 1. Choose Work

- **Check Issues**: Look for issues labeled `good first issue`, `help wanted`, or `mathematical`
- **Propose Ideas**: Open an issue to discuss new ideas before implementing
- **Mathematical Focus**: Contributions involving mathematical guarantees are highly valued

### 2. Create Branch

```bash
# For features
git checkout -b feature/your-feature-name

# For bug fixes
git checkout -b fix/issue-number-description

# For mathematical improvements
git checkout -b math/improved-invariant-verification

# For documentation
git checkout -b docs/update-api-reference
```

### 3. Implement Changes

Follow the **Mathematical Autopsy** process for math-related changes:

#### Phase 1: Intent & Description
- Document the problem and solution approach
- Define success criteria

#### Phase 2: Mathematical Foundation
- Formalize mathematics in documentation
- Define equations, invariants, and guarantees

#### Phase 3: Implementation
- Write code that implements the documented math
- Maintain mathematical correctness

#### Phase 4: Verification
- Create verification notebooks (for mathematical repos)
- Prove invariants with executable code
- Generate artifacts for CI validation

#### Phase 5: Validation
- Run all tests and quality checks
- Ensure mathematical guarantees are maintained

### 4. Quality Standards

#### Code Quality
- **Type Hints**: All functions must have type annotations
- **Documentation**: Comprehensive docstrings for public APIs
- **Linting**: Pass all automated code quality checks
- **Testing**: Minimum 80% test coverage

#### Mathematical Rigor
- **Invariants**: Define mathematical constraints that must hold
- **Verification**: Provide executable proofs of correctness
- **Determinism**: Ensure deterministic behavior with seeded randomness
- **Documentation**: Document all mathematical assumptions and guarantees

#### Security
- **Input Validation**: Validate all inputs to prevent injection attacks
- **Cryptographic Security**: Use proper cryptographic primitives
- **Access Control**: Implement proper authorization checks
- **Audit Trails**: Log security-relevant events

### 5. Testing

#### Unit Tests
```python
import pytest
from your_module import YourClass

class TestYourClass:
    def test_basic_functionality(self):
        """Test basic functionality with clear assertions."""
        instance = YourClass()
        result = instance.process("input")
        assert result is not None
        assert isinstance(result, ExpectedType)

    def test_edge_cases(self):
        """Test edge cases and error conditions."""
        instance = YourClass()

        # Test invalid inputs
        with pytest.raises(ValueError):
            instance.process(None)

        # Test boundary conditions
        result = instance.process("")
        assert result == expected_empty_result
```

#### Integration Tests
```python
import pytest
from httpx import AsyncClient
from your_service import app

@pytest.mark.asyncio
async def test_api_integration():
    """Test full API integration."""
    async with AsyncClient(app=app, base_url="http://test") as client:
        response = await client.post("/api/endpoint", json={"data": "test"})
        assert response.status_code == 200

        result = response.json()
        assert "result" in result
        assert result["success"] is True
```

#### Mathematical Verification
```python
# In verification notebooks
import numpy as np
from your_math_module import mathematical_function

# Set seed for deterministic testing
np.random.seed(42)

def test_mathematical_guarantees():
    """Test mathematical invariants and guarantees."""

    # Test energy conservation
    input_signal = np.random.randn(1000)
    output_signal = mathematical_function(input_signal)

    # Parseval's theorem: Energy conservation in FFT
    input_energy = np.sum(np.abs(input_signal) ** 2)
    output_energy = np.sum(np.abs(output_signal) ** 2)

    # Allow small numerical errors
    assert abs(input_energy - output_energy) < 1e-10

    # Test determinism
    output_signal_2 = mathematical_function(input_signal)
    assert np.allclose(output_signal, output_signal_2)
```

### 6. Documentation

#### Code Documentation
```python
def complex_mathematical_function(
    signal: np.ndarray,
    frequency_cutoff: float,
    sampling_rate: int
) -> np.ndarray:
    """
    Apply mathematical transformation to signal.

    This function implements a mathematically verified transformation
    that preserves signal energy while filtering frequencies.

    Args:
        signal: Input signal array
        frequency_cutoff: Cutoff frequency in Hz
        sampling_rate: Signal sampling rate in Hz

    Returns:
        Filtered signal with same energy as input

    Raises:
        ValueError: If parameters are invalid

    Mathematical Guarantee:
        Energy conservation: ∫|input(t)|²dt = ∫|output(t)|²dt

    Example:
        >>> signal = np.random.randn(1000)
        >>> filtered = complex_mathematical_function(signal, 100, 1000)
        >>> assert np.isclose(np.sum(signal**2), np.sum(filtered**2))
    """
```

#### README Updates
Update repository README.md for any user-facing changes:
- New features or capabilities
- API changes
- Configuration updates
- Breaking changes

### 7. Commit Standards

#### Commit Message Format
```
type(scope): description

[optional body]

[optional footer]
```

#### Types
- `feat`: New features
- `fix`: Bug fixes
- `docs`: Documentation changes
- `style`: Code style changes
- `refactor`: Code refactoring
- `test`: Adding or updating tests
- `chore`: Maintenance tasks
- `math`: Mathematical improvements or proofs

#### Examples
```
feat(auth): add OAuth2 integration with cryptographic verification

fix(api): resolve memory leak in batch processing endpoint

math(invariants): strengthen energy conservation proof with formal verification

docs(api): update parameter descriptions for clarity
```

#### Scope
- `api`: API-related changes
- `auth`: Authentication/authorization
- `math`: Mathematical components
- `security`: Security features
- `ui`: User interface (if applicable)

### 8. Pull Request Process

#### PR Template
Use the organization PR template with:

1. **Description**: Clear explanation of changes
2. **Type of Change**: Bug fix, feature, breaking change, etc.
3. **Testing**: Unit tests, integration tests, mathematical verification
4. **Quality Assurance**: Code quality, security review, performance impact
5. **Documentation**: Updates made or needed
6. **Breaking Changes**: Migration instructions if applicable

#### PR Checklist
- [ ] **Mathematical Verification**: Invariants validated, notebooks run
- [ ] **Testing**: All tests pass, coverage maintained
- [ ] **Code Quality**: Linting passes, type hints complete
- [ ] **Security**: Security implications reviewed
- [ ] **Documentation**: README and API docs updated
- [ ] **Breaking Changes**: Migration guide provided if needed

#### Review Process
1. **Automated Checks**: CI/CD runs all quality gates
2. **Peer Review**: At least one maintainer reviews code
3. **Mathematical Review**: Math-related changes reviewed by math experts
4. **Security Review**: Security implications assessed
5. **Merge**: Squash merge with conventional commit message

## 🎯 Contribution Areas

### High-Impact Contributions

#### Mathematical Research
- Improve mathematical foundations
- Strengthen invariants and proofs
- Develop new verification techniques
- Advance deterministic AI theory

#### Security Enhancements
- Cryptographic improvements
- Access control enhancements
- Audit trail improvements
- Security testing frameworks

#### Performance Optimization
- Algorithm improvements with mathematical guarantees
- Memory optimization with energy conservation
- Parallel processing enhancements
- Scalability improvements

### Getting Help

- **Documentation**: Check repository-specific docs first
- **Issues**: Search existing GitHub issues
- **Discussions**: Use GitHub Discussions for questions
- **Community**: Join our community forum

## 📋 Code of Conduct

All contributors must adhere to our [Code of Conduct](CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md), which emphasizes:

- Mathematical rigor and scientific integrity
- Respectful collaboration
- Professional conduct
- Commitment to diversity and inclusion

## 📄 License

By contributing to SMARTHAUS, you agree that your contributions will be licensed under the same license as the repository you're contributing to.

## 🙏 Recognition

Contributors are recognized through:

- **GitHub Contributors**: Listed in repository contributor graphs
- **Changelog**: Mentioned in release notes
- **Community**: Featured in community spotlights
- **Events**: Invited to speak at SMARTHAUS events

## 📞 Contact

- **General Questions**: Open a GitHub Discussion
- **Technical Issues**: Create a GitHub Issue
- **Security Issues**: security@smarthaus.group
- **Business Inquiries**: business@smarthaus.group

---

**Thank you for contributing to the future of mathematics-driven AI!** 🧮✨

Your contributions help advance our mission of building AI systems where mathematics serves as the nervous system, enabling provably correct, deterministic, and trustworthy artificial intelligence.
