archetypes/mge/README.md, before:

# 🛡️ Archetype 3: MGE (Mathematical Governance Engine)

**Certus Securitas Ex Machina** — Deterministic AI governance through cryptographic mathematics.

[![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-Proprietary-red.svg)](../../../LICENSE)
[![Status](https://img.shields.io/badge/status-Active%20Development-brightgreen.svg)](#)
[![MGE Core](https://img.shields.io/badge/MGE-Core-1.0.0-green.svg)](#)

## 🌟 Vision

**Replace probabilistic AI safety with mathematical certainty.** Instead of hoping AI follows rules, MGE provides cryptographic proof that every AI action complies with governance requirements.

MGE serves as the **mathematical immune system** for AI, providing:
- **Cryptographic Receipts**: Tamper-proof proof of compliance for every decision
- **Deterministic Enforcement**: Mathematical guarantees, not statistical approximations
- **Enterprise Scale**: Sub-millisecond governance checks for high-throughput AI systems
- **Cross-Archetype Security**: Protects both TAI and AIVA systems with unified governance

## 🎯 What Makes MGE Different

### The Problem with Current AI Safety

Traditional AI safety relies on:
- ❌ **Probabilistic models** that might fail
- ❌ **Post-hoc monitoring** that can't prevent violations
- ❌ **Statistical approximations** that lack mathematical rigor
- ❌ **Manual oversight** that doesn't scale

### The MGE Solution

MGE provides:
- ✅ **Cryptographic certainty** - Every decision is mathematically signed
- ✅ **Pre-execution validation** - Blocks violations before they occur
- ✅ **Mathematical proofs** - Formal verification of governance rules
- ✅ **Automated enforcement** - Scales to millions of decisions per second

## 🏗️ Architecture

### Core Components

```
┌─────────────────┐    ┌──────────────────┐    ┌─────────────────┐
│   AI System     │    │   MGE Service    │    │   Decision      │
│   (TAI/AIVA)    │────│   (Sidecar)      │────│   Receipt       │
│                 │    │                  │    │                 │
│ 1. Action       │    │ 2. Evaluate      │    │ 3. Signed       │
│    Request      │    │    Rules         │    │    Decision     │
└─────────────────┘    └──────────────────┘    └─────────────────┘
                                │
                                ▼
                       ┌──────────────────┐
                       │   Execution      │
                       │   Layer          │
                       │                  │
                       │ 4. Verify        │
                       │    Receipt       │
                       └──────────────────┘
```

### Rule Engine

MGE supports multiple rule formats for different use cases:

#### MDC Format (Human-Readable)
```markdown
---
description: "Production database access control"
category: "data_governance"
alwaysApply: true
---

# Database Access Control

**Rule ID:** `db-access-control`

## Prohibited
- Direct database modifications in production
- Raw SQL queries from application code

## Required
- All database operations must use ORM
- Connections must use SSL/TLS encryption
```

#### YAML Format (Structured)
```yaml
rule_id: "api-rate-limiting"
name: "API Rate Limiting"
description: "Prevent API abuse through rate limiting"
category: "security"

conditions:
  - type: "rate_limit_check"
    parameters:
      requests_per_minute: 1000
      burst_limit: 100
```

#### JSON Format (Programmatic)
```json
{
  "rule_id": "data-encryption",
  "name": "Data Encryption Policy",
  "description": "Require encryption for sensitive data",
  "category": "security",
  "conditions": [
    {
      "type": "encryption_required",
      "parameters": {
        "algorithms": ["AES-256-GCM", "ChaCha20-Poly1305"],
        "key_rotation_days": 90
      }
    }
  ]
}
```

### Cryptographic Receipts

Every MGE decision includes a cryptographic receipt:

```json
{
  "decision_id": "dec-1234567890",
  "approved": true,
  "reasoning": "All rules passed",
  "rule_ids": ["security-baseline", "user-access"],
  "timestamp": "2024-01-15T10:30:00Z",
  "receipt": {
    "signature": "hmac-sha256-signature",
    "nonce": "unique-cryptographic-nonce",
    "decision_hash": "sha256-hash-of-decision"
  }
}
```

## 📊 Performance & Scale

### Benchmarks
- **Latency**: < 1ms per governance check
- **Throughput**: 10,000+ checks/second per instance
- **Scale**: Horizontally scalable across multiple instances
- **Reliability**: 99.999% uptime with automatic failover

### Enterprise Features
- **Multi-tenant isolation** - Separate governance domains
- **High availability** - Automatic failover and load balancing
- **Audit trails** - Complete decision history with receipts
- **Performance monitoring** - Real-time metrics and alerting

## 🔧 Integration Options

### Direct API Integration

```python
import httpx
import asyncio

async def check_governance(action, context):
    async with httpx.AsyncClient() as client:
        response = await client.post(
            "http://mge-service:8080/api/v1/governance/check",
            json={"action": action, "context": context}
        )

        decision = response.json()
        if decision["approved"]:
            # Execute action with receipt verification
            await execute_with_receipt(action, decision["receipt"])
        else:
            raise SecurityError(decision["reasoning"])
```

### SDK Integration

For comprehensive SDK documentation and examples, see the MGE SDK documentation (on this site or on request).

```python
from mge_sdk import MGEClient

# Initialize client
client = MGEClient("http://mge-service:8080")

# Check compliance
decision = await client.check_compliance(action, context)

if decision.approved:
    # Action is approved with cryptographic proof
    await execute_action(action)
else:
    # Action blocked with clear reasoning
    log_security_violation(decision)
```

**SDK Resources:**
- **Installation Guide** - Get started with the SDK (available with MGE licensing)
- **API Reference** - Complete SDK documentation
- **Integration Guide** - Integration patterns and best practices
- **Rule Creation Guide** - Creating custom governance rules

### Sidecar Deployment

```yaml
# Kubernetes sidecar configuration
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: ai-with-mge
spec:
  containers:
  - name: ai-application
    image: my-ai-app:latest
  - name: mge-sidecar
    image: registry.smarthaus.ai/mge-core:latest
    ports:
    - containerPort: 8080
    env:
    - name: MGE_SECRET_KEY
      valueFrom:
        secretKeyRef:
          name: mge-secrets
          key: secret-key
```

## 🎯 Use Cases

### Enterprise AI Governance
**Challenge**: Large organizations need to ensure AI systems comply with corporate policies, regulatory requirements, and security standards.

**MGE Solution**:
- Automatic enforcement of governance policies
- Cryptographic audit trails for compliance reporting
- Real-time blocking of policy violations
- Integration with existing enterprise security systems

### Critical Infrastructure Protection
**Challenge**: AI systems controlling power grids, transportation, and healthcare must guarantee safety.

**MGE Solution**:
- Mathematical safety guarantees for AI decisions
- Cryptographic proof of compliance for regulators
- Real-time validation of safety-critical actions
- Integration with SCADA and industrial control systems

### Development Workflow Security
**Challenge**: Development teams need to maintain security while enabling rapid iteration.

**MGE Solution**:
- Automated security gate enforcement in CI/CD
- Cryptographic signing of deployment decisions
- Real-time validation of infrastructure changes
- Integration with existing DevSecOps pipelines

## 📦 MGE on this site

MGE (Mathematical Governance Engine) is documented on this site. Documentation, installation guides, SDK for custom governance rules, and core service implementation are available; contact SmartHaus for access and licensing.

## 🔄 Relationship to Other Archetypes

MGE provides governance across all SMARTHAUS archetypes:

### Securing TAI (Personal Assistant)
- **Voice interaction safety** - Validates all voice commands
- **Memory access control** - Governs what TAI can remember/learn
- **External API calls** - Validates third-party integrations
- **User privacy** - Enforces data handling policies

### Securing AIVA (Triadic System)
- **Biology layer** - Governs neural network operations
- **Chemistry layer** - Validates symbolic transformations
- **Physics layer** - Controls particle-based computations
- **Inter-layer communication** - Secures cross-layer data flow

### Integration with RFS
- **Field access control** - Governs what can be stored/retrieved
- **Query validation** - Ensures safe field operations
- **Energy conservation** - Validates mathematical properties
- **Resonance safety** - Prevents unsafe field interactions

## 🛡️ Security Model

### Cryptographic Guarantees

1. **Receipt Integrity**: HMAC-SHA256 signatures prevent tampering
2. **Decision Binding**: Receipts are cryptographically bound to decisions
3. **Nonce Protection**: Prevents replay attacks
4. **Timestamp Validation**: Ensures temporal integrity

### Access Control

- **Role-Based Access**: Fine-grained permissions for rule management
- **API Key Authentication**: Secure service-to-service communication
- **OAuth Integration**: Enterprise identity provider support
- **Multi-Tenant Isolation**: Separate governance domains

### Audit & Compliance

- **Complete Audit Trail**: Every decision logged with cryptographic proof
- **Regulatory Compliance**: Supports SOC 2, PCI DSS, HIPAA requirements
- **Data Retention**: Configurable audit log retention policies
- **Export Capabilities**: Audit data export for compliance reporting

## 🚀 Getting Started

### Quick Start

1. **Get MGE**: Contact SmartHaus for enterprise licensing
2. **Deploy Service**: Use Docker or Kubernetes manifests
3. **Configure Rules**: Use MGE SDK or direct API to define policies
4. **Integrate Systems**: Add governance checks to your AI applications
5. **Monitor**: Set up monitoring and alerting for governance metrics

### Development Setup

Contact SmartHaus for access to MGE core and SDK. Installation and development setup guides are provided with licensing.

### Rule Development

```python
from mge_sdk import RuleBuilder

# Create a custom security rule
builder = RuleBuilder()
builder.create_rule(
    rule_id="my-security-policy",
    name="Custom Security Policy",
    category="security"
)

builder.add_condition(
    rule_id="my-security-policy",
    condition_type="file_access_control",
    parameters={"allowed_paths": ["/safe/*"], "blocked_extensions": [".exe"]}
)

# Export to MDC format
mdc_content = builder.to_mdc("my-security-policy")
with open("my-rule.mdc", "w") as f:
    f.write(mdc_content)
```

## 📚 Documentation

Installation, integration, API reference, SDK documentation, rule formats (MDC, YAML, JSON), and rule creation guides are available with MGE licensing. Contact SmartHaus for access.

## 🤝 Support & Community

### Enterprise Support
- **24/7 Technical Support** - Round-the-clock for licensed customers
- **Dedicated Solutions Architect** - Technical guidance and best practices
- **Custom Integration Support** - Assistance with complex deployments
- **Performance Optimization** - Expert tuning for high-throughput scenarios

### Community Resources
- **Support** - Contact SmartHaus for bug reports, feature requests, and rule development support

### Contact
- **Sales**: sales@smarthaus.group
- **Support**: support@smarthaus.group
- **Security**: security@smarthaus.group

## 📈 Roadmap

### Q1 2024: Core Release
- ✅ Cryptographic receipt system
- ✅ Multi-format rule engine
- ✅ REST API with authentication
- ✅ SDK for rule development

### Q2 2024: Enterprise Features
- 🔄 Advanced audit and compliance reporting
- 🔄 Kubernetes native deployment
- 🔄 Multi-cloud integrations
- 🔄 Performance monitoring dashboard

### Q3 2024: Advanced Governance
- 📋 Machine learning-based rule optimization
- 📋 Dynamic policy adaptation
- 📋 Cross-system governance orchestration
- 📋 Advanced threat detection

### Q4 2024: Ecosystem Expansion
- 🌐 Third-party integrations
- 🌐 Custom rule marketplace
- 🌐 Multi-tenant governance platforms
- 🌐 Advanced analytics and insights

---

**MGE represents the future of AI governance: mathematical certainty, cryptographic proof, and enterprise-scale enforcement.**

[Contact Sales](mailto:sales@smarthaus.group) to learn how MGE can secure your AI systems with mathematical guarantees.

Commit message:

docs: expand archetype READMEs with rich paragraphs
- TAI parts (VEE, CAIO, MAIA, NME, VFE): Role and Integration as full paragraphs
- AIVA sub-pages (AQL, AEF, COE, SNS, ANS): Integration and sections as prose
- AIVA main and TAI main: Overview, layer descriptions, Integration Between Layers as paragraphs
- MGE: add Why MGE (design rationale) section
- RFS, MA: retain existing depth; rationale woven into body where applicable

archetypes/mge/README.md, after:

# 🛡️ Archetype 3: MGE (Mathematical Governance Engine)

**Certus Securitas Ex Machina** — Deterministic AI governance through cryptographic mathematics.

[![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-Proprietary-red.svg)](../../../LICENSE)
[![Status](https://img.shields.io/badge/status-Active%20Development-brightgreen.svg)](#)
[![MGE Core](https://img.shields.io/badge/MGE-Core-1.0.0-green.svg)](#)

## 🌟 Vision

**Replace probabilistic AI safety with mathematical certainty.** Instead of hoping AI follows rules, MGE provides cryptographic proof that every AI action complies with governance requirements.

## Why MGE (design rationale)

Across TAI and AIVA we aim for **determinism, auditability, and fail-close**—not “the model will probably behave.” Governance is no exception: we don’t want “maybe it followed the policy”; we want **proof**. MGE is the layer that turns governance into **math**: every decision is checked against rules before execution, and every outcome is signed (cryptographic receipt). That gives us: (1) **pre-execution enforcement**—violations are blocked, not just logged; (2) **tamper-evident audit**—receipts bind decision to rules and timestamp; (3) **one governance plane** for both TAI and AIVA, so policy is consistent and auditable across archetypes. Same philosophy as lattice axioms and RFS field theory: **provable, not probabilistic**.

MGE serves as the **mathematical immune system** for AI, providing:
- **Cryptographic Receipts**: Tamper-proof proof of compliance for every decision
- **Deterministic Enforcement**: Mathematical guarantees, not statistical approximations
- **Enterprise Scale**: Sub-millisecond governance checks for high-throughput AI systems
- **Cross-Archetype Security**: Protects both TAI and AIVA systems with unified governance

## 🎯 What Makes MGE Different

### The Problem with Current AI Safety

Traditional AI safety relies on:
- ❌ **Probabilistic models** that might fail
- ❌ **Post-hoc monitoring** that can't prevent violations
- ❌ **Statistical approximations** that lack mathematical rigor
- ❌ **Manual oversight** that doesn't scale

### The MGE Solution

MGE provides:
- ✅ **Cryptographic certainty** - Every decision is mathematically signed
- ✅ **Pre-execution validation** - Blocks violations before they occur
- ✅ **Mathematical proofs** - Formal verification of governance rules
- ✅ **Automated enforcement** - Scales to millions of decisions per second

## 🏗️ Architecture

### Core Components

```
┌─────────────────┐    ┌──────────────────┐    ┌─────────────────┐
│   AI System     │    │   MGE Service    │    │   Decision      │
│   (TAI/AIVA)    │────│   (Sidecar)      │────│   Receipt       │
│                 │    │                  │    │                 │
│ 1. Action       │    │ 2. Evaluate      │    │ 3. Signed       │
│    Request      │    │    Rules         │    │    Decision     │
└─────────────────┘    └──────────────────┘    └─────────────────┘
                                │
                                ▼
                       ┌──────────────────┐
                       │   Execution      │
                       │   Layer          │
                       │                  │
                       │ 4. Verify        │
                       │    Receipt       │
                       └──────────────────┘
```

### Rule Engine

MGE supports multiple rule formats for different use cases:

#### MDC Format (Human-Readable)
```markdown
---
description: "Production database access control"
category: "data_governance"
alwaysApply: true
---

# Database Access Control

**Rule ID:** `db-access-control`

## Prohibited
- Direct database modifications in production
- Raw SQL queries from application code

## Required
- All database operations must use ORM
- Connections must use SSL/TLS encryption
```

#### YAML Format (Structured)
```yaml
rule_id: "api-rate-limiting"
name: "API Rate Limiting"
description: "Prevent API abuse through rate limiting"
category: "security"

conditions:
  - type: "rate_limit_check"
    parameters:
      requests_per_minute: 1000
      burst_limit: 100
```

#### JSON Format (Programmatic)
```json
{
  "rule_id": "data-encryption",
  "name": "Data Encryption Policy",
  "description": "Require encryption for sensitive data",
  "category": "security",
  "conditions": [
    {
      "type": "encryption_required",
      "parameters": {
        "algorithms": ["AES-256-GCM", "ChaCha20-Poly1305"],
        "key_rotation_days": 90
      }
    }
  ]
}
```

### Cryptographic Receipts

Every MGE decision includes a cryptographic receipt:

```json
{
  "decision_id": "dec-1234567890",
  "approved": true,
  "reasoning": "All rules passed",
  "rule_ids": ["security-baseline", "user-access"],
  "timestamp": "2024-01-15T10:30:00Z",
  "receipt": {
    "signature": "hmac-sha256-signature",
    "nonce": "unique-cryptographic-nonce",
    "decision_hash": "sha256-hash-of-decision"
  }
}
```

## 📊 Performance & Scale

### Benchmarks
- **Latency**: < 1ms per governance check
- **Throughput**: 10,000+ checks/second per instance
- **Scale**: Horizontally scalable across multiple instances
- **Reliability**: 99.999% uptime with automatic failover

### Enterprise Features
- **Multi-tenant isolation** - Separate governance domains
- **High availability** - Automatic failover and load balancing
- **Audit trails** - Complete decision history with receipts
- **Performance monitoring** - Real-time metrics and alerting

## 🔧 Integration Options

### Direct API Integration

```python
import httpx
import asyncio

async def check_governance(action, context):
    async with httpx.AsyncClient() as client:
        response = await client.post(
            "http://mge-service:8080/api/v1/governance/check",
            json={"action": action, "context": context}
        )

        decision = response.json()
        if decision["approved"]:
            # Execute action with receipt verification
            await execute_with_receipt(action, decision["receipt"])
        else:
            raise SecurityError(decision["reasoning"])
```

### SDK Integration

For comprehensive SDK documentation and examples, see the MGE SDK documentation (on this site or on request).

```python
from mge_sdk import MGEClient

# Initialize client
client = MGEClient("http://mge-service:8080")

# Check compliance
decision = await client.check_compliance(action, context)

if decision.approved:
    # Action is approved with cryptographic proof
    await execute_action(action)
else:
    # Action blocked with clear reasoning
    log_security_violation(decision)
```

**SDK Resources:**
- **Installation Guide** - Get started with the SDK (available with MGE licensing)
- **API Reference** - Complete SDK documentation
- **Integration Guide** - Integration patterns and best practices
- **Rule Creation Guide** - Creating custom governance rules

### Sidecar Deployment

```yaml
# Kubernetes sidecar configuration
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: ai-with-mge
spec:
  containers:
  - name: ai-application
    image: my-ai-app:latest
  - name: mge-sidecar
    image: registry.smarthaus.ai/mge-core:latest
    ports:
    - containerPort: 8080
    env:
    - name: MGE_SECRET_KEY
      valueFrom:
        secretKeyRef:
          name: mge-secrets
          key: secret-key
```

## 🎯 Use Cases

### Enterprise AI Governance
**Challenge**: Large organizations need to ensure AI systems comply with corporate policies, regulatory requirements, and security standards.

**MGE Solution**:
- Automatic enforcement of governance policies
- Cryptographic audit trails for compliance reporting
- Real-time blocking of policy violations
- Integration with existing enterprise security systems

### Critical Infrastructure Protection
**Challenge**: AI systems controlling power grids, transportation, and healthcare must guarantee safety.

**MGE Solution**:
- Mathematical safety guarantees for AI decisions
- Cryptographic proof of compliance for regulators
- Real-time validation of safety-critical actions
- Integration with SCADA and industrial control systems

### Development Workflow Security
**Challenge**: Development teams need to maintain security while enabling rapid iteration.

**MGE Solution**:
- Automated security gate enforcement in CI/CD
- Cryptographic signing of deployment decisions
- Real-time validation of infrastructure changes
- Integration with existing DevSecOps pipelines

## 📦 MGE on this site

MGE (Mathematical Governance Engine) is documented on this site. Documentation, installation guides, SDK for custom governance rules, and core service implementation are available; contact SmartHaus for access and licensing.

## 🔄 Relationship to Other Archetypes

MGE provides governance across all SMARTHAUS archetypes:

### Securing TAI (Personal Assistant)
- **Voice interaction safety** - Validates all voice commands
- **Memory access control** - Governs what TAI can remember/learn
- **External API calls** - Validates third-party integrations
- **User privacy** - Enforces data handling policies

### Securing AIVA (Triadic System)
- **Biology layer** - Governs neural network operations
- **Chemistry layer** - Validates symbolic transformations
- **Physics layer** - Controls particle-based computations
- **Inter-layer communication** - Secures cross-layer data flow

### Integration with RFS
- **Field access control** - Governs what can be stored/retrieved
- **Query validation** - Ensures safe field operations
- **Energy conservation** - Validates mathematical properties
- **Resonance safety** - Prevents unsafe field interactions

## 🛡️ Security Model

### Cryptographic Guarantees

1. **Receipt Integrity**: HMAC-SHA256 signatures prevent tampering
2. **Decision Binding**: Receipts are cryptographically bound to decisions
3. **Nonce Protection**: Prevents replay attacks
4. **Timestamp Validation**: Ensures temporal integrity

### Access Control

- **Role-Based Access**: Fine-grained permissions for rule management
- **API Key Authentication**: Secure service-to-service communication
- **OAuth Integration**: Enterprise identity provider support
- **Multi-Tenant Isolation**: Separate governance domains

### Audit & Compliance

- **Complete Audit Trail**: Every decision logged with cryptographic proof
- **Regulatory Compliance**: Supports SOC 2, PCI DSS, HIPAA requirements
- **Data Retention**: Configurable audit log retention policies
- **Export Capabilities**: Audit data export for compliance reporting

## 🚀 Getting Started

### Quick Start

1. **Get MGE**: Contact SmartHaus for enterprise licensing
2. **Deploy Service**: Use Docker or Kubernetes manifests
3. **Configure Rules**: Use MGE SDK or direct API to define policies
4. **Integrate Systems**: Add governance checks to your AI applications
5. **Monitor**: Set up monitoring and alerting for governance metrics

### Development Setup

Contact SmartHaus for access to MGE core and SDK. Installation and development setup guides are provided with licensing.

### Rule Development

```python
from mge_sdk import RuleBuilder

# Create a custom security rule
builder = RuleBuilder()
builder.create_rule(
    rule_id="my-security-policy",
    name="Custom Security Policy",
    category="security"
)

builder.add_condition(
    rule_id="my-security-policy",
    condition_type="file_access_control",
    parameters={"allowed_paths": ["/safe/*"], "blocked_extensions": [".exe"]}
)

# Export to MDC format
mdc_content = builder.to_mdc("my-security-policy")
with open("my-rule.mdc", "w") as f:
    f.write(mdc_content)
```

## 📚 Documentation

Installation, integration, API reference, SDK documentation, rule formats (MDC, YAML, JSON), and rule creation guides are available with MGE licensing. Contact SmartHaus for access.

## 🤝 Support & Community

### Enterprise Support
- **24/7 Technical Support** - Round-the-clock for licensed customers
- **Dedicated Solutions Architect** - Technical guidance and best practices
- **Custom Integration Support** - Assistance with complex deployments
- **Performance Optimization** - Expert tuning for high-throughput scenarios

### Community Resources
- **Support** - Contact SmartHaus for bug reports, feature requests, and rule development support

### Contact
- **Sales**: sales@smarthaus.group
- **Support**: support@smarthaus.group
- **Security**: security@smarthaus.group

## 📈 Roadmap

### Q1 2024: Core Release
- ✅ Cryptographic receipt system
- ✅ Multi-format rule engine
- ✅ REST API with authentication
- ✅ SDK for rule development

### Q2 2024: Enterprise Features
- 🔄 Advanced audit and compliance reporting
- 🔄 Kubernetes native deployment
- 🔄 Multi-cloud integrations
- 🔄 Performance monitoring dashboard

### Q3 2024: Advanced Governance
- 📋 Machine learning-based rule optimization
- 📋 Dynamic policy adaptation
- 📋 Cross-system governance orchestration
- 📋 Advanced threat detection

### Q4 2024: Ecosystem Expansion
- 🌐 Third-party integrations
- 🌐 Custom rule marketplace
- 🌐 Multi-tenant governance platforms
- 🌐 Advanced analytics and insights

---

**MGE represents the future of AI governance: mathematical certainty, cryptographic proof, and enterprise-scale enforcement.**

[Contact Sales](mailto:sales@smarthaus.group) to learn how MGE can secure your AI systems with mathematical guarantees.
