docs/intro.md, before:

---
slug: /
---

# SMARTHAUS Documentation

Welcome to the **SMARTHAUS** documentation. This site is the technical companion to [smarthaus.ai](https://www.smarthaus.ai).

## What is SMARTHAUS?

SMARTHAUS builds AI systems where **mathematics serves as the nervous system**. At the core is **Resonant Field Storage (RFS)** — the mathematical memory substrate for both TAI and AIVA.

## What's in these docs?

- **[Framework (Thesis)](thesis/framework)** — Full framework document: *Mathematics as the Nervous System of AI* (field theory, invariants, benchmarks).
- **[Resonant Field Storage (RFS)](rfs/overview)** — Overview, field theory vs vector space, and use cases.
- **[Mathematical Autopsy (MA)](mathematical-autopsy/overview)** — Our math-first methodology.
- **[Archetypes](archetypes/tai)** — TAI (personal assistant), AIVA (system-building intelligence), MGE (governance rules engine).

## Quick links

- [Website](https://www.smarthaus.ai)
- [GitHub (this repo)](https://github.com/SmartHausGroup/.github)

Commit message:

Docs: sidebar categories, intro narrative, AIVA architecture image
- Sidebar: Getting started, Framework, RFS, Methodology, Archetypes
- Intro: narrative order matching sidebar
- Footer: add About, rename MA to Methodology (MA)
- AIVA page: replace ASCII diagram with static/img/aiva-architecture.png

docs/intro.md, after:

---
slug: /
---

# SMARTHAUS Documentation

Welcome to the **SMARTHAUS** documentation. This site is the technical companion to [smarthaus.ai](https://www.smarthaus.ai).

## What is SMARTHAUS?

SMARTHAUS builds AI systems where **mathematics serves as the nervous system**. At the core is **Resonant Field Storage (RFS)** — the mathematical memory substrate for both TAI and AIVA.

## How these docs are organized

We ordered the sidebar to match a single path: **who we are → why we do this → what it’s built on → how we validate it → what we build.**

1. **Getting started** — Start here ([Intro](/)) and [About](about) for who we are.
2. **Framework** — The [framework (thesis)](thesis/framework) explains *why*: mathematics as the nervous system of AI (field theory, invariants, benchmarks).
3. **Resonant Field Storage (RFS)** — The [overview](rfs/overview), [field theory](rfs/field-theory), and [use cases](rfs/use-cases/overview) describe the memory substrate everything else builds on.
4. **Methodology** — [Mathematical Autopsy (MA)](mathematical-autopsy/overview) is how we stress-test and validate the math.
5. **Archetypes** — What we build on top: [TAI](archetypes/tai) (personal assistant), [AIVA](archetypes/aiva) (system-building intelligence), [MGE](archetypes/mge) (governance rules engine).

## Quick links

- [Website](https://www.smarthaus.ai)
- [GitHub (this repo)](https://github.com/SmartHausGroup/.github)
